(guitar riff)
(slow electronic music)
- [Voiceover] Grains
have been staple sources
of nutrition and livelihood
for most cultures and
countries for centuries.
(gentle music)
But like majority of
food in modern times,
most common types of
grain such as wheat,
rye and rice undergo processes
that strip them
off of nutrients.
What people of the modern world
may not be aware of
is that there are
other types of grains
that have existed
for hundred of years.
And whose nutritional profile
can address their need
for healthier diets.
(jazzy music)
Most popular of these
ancient grains is quinoa.
Pronounced as keen-wah,
its name is derived
from the Quechua word,
kinwa or kinua,
which means "mother".
Aptly named because the
Incas regarded quinoa
as the mother of all grains.
Records show that
early cultivation,
domestication and
consumption of quinoa
can be traced back as
far as 3000 to 5000 BC,
when it became a
popular and staple food
in the Andes Mountain
region in South America.
Which presently constitutes
Argentina, Bolivia,
Chile, Columbia,
Ecuador and Peru.
However, in the 1530's,
during the Spanish
conquest of South America,
quinoa almost became extinct.
Out of disdain for the grain,
which they dubbed as
"food for Indians",
and to demoralize the empire,
weaken the Incas culture,
and force it into submission,
Spanish colonists and explorers
including Francisco Pizarro,
destroyed hundreds
of quinoa fields.
The colonists also
ordered the Incas
to stop cultivating the grain
due to its status
as a sacred item
in Incas religious ceremonies,
and that they grow wheat
and barley instead.
Thanks to quinoa's
inherent resilience
to low-nutrient soil and
rough winds at high altitudes,
wild varieties continue
to thrive in higher parts
of the Andes mountains,
saving its species
from total annihilation
and allowing the natives to
continue eating the grain
in secrecy.
Quinoa was an integral
piece in the Inca culture
and along with the
empire's demise
was quinoa's inevitable
fall into obscurity.
Between 1970 and 1980,
quinoa was rediscovered
by two Americans who
stumbled upon the grain
while they were in
the Bolivian Andes.
Impressed by the
grain's many wonders,
they began planting
and cultivating it
in Colorado, USA.
Quinoa, with scientific
name Chenopodium quinoa,
is a species of Chenopodium,
or goosefoot plants.
It is also known
as a pseudograin
or pseudocereal
because unlike barley,
wheat and rice which belong
to the true grass family,
it is a leafy grain
closely related to spinach,
beets and chards.
The quinoa plant
grows up to two meters
or six feet tall.
Its triangular or
sometimes ovate leaves
are covered with calcium oxalate
which enables them
to lock moisture
and protect itself from
the sun's radiation
when grown in high altitudes.
Its two millimeter
round asheens or fruits,
produce seeds that
vary in color.
White, yellow, red,
brown and black.
There are over 100 known
varieties of quinoa,
but these can be classified
into five major categories.
First, the Valley Quinoas.
These quinoas are found
in inter-Andean valleys
between 6500 and 12000
feet above sea level
and grow up to three meters.
Second, the Altiplano
Quinoas which grow
in areas near Lake Titicaca
and are shorter
than Valley Quinoas.
Third, the Saltflat Quinoas.
These grow in Southern Bolivia
and can survive in areas
with less or no water.
Fourth, the Sea Level Quinoas
which are mainly
found in South Chile
and produce bitter yellow seeds.
And fifth, the Sub
Tropics Quinoa.
This variety thrives in
the valleys of Bolivia
and have adapted in
sub tropical climates.
Their stems turn
orange upon maturity
and their seeds are small.
Because of quinoa's
ability to grow
in varying heights,
temperature, and climate,
its cultivation has transcended
geographical boundaries.
It's now also being
produced in countries
across the globe,
like Canada, France,
United Kingdom,
Sweden, Denmark, Italy,
Kenya and even India.
(electronic music)
The people of the
ancient Inca empire
revered quinoa and for centuries
this grain has
provided the natives
of the Andes mountains
with sustenance and nutrition.
But recent studies
show that quinoa
shouldn't remain in the past,
nor stay just as an
alternative to most grains
like rice or wheat.
Its nutrition profile
remain priceless today
and it was years ago.
Quinoa is actually
considered a superfood
in so many ways.
In terms of protein,
one serving of quinoa
can already provide the body
with all eight
essential amino acids.
It is rich in lysine,
an amino acid that is
deficient in most grains.
This makes quinoa an
idea source of protein,
especially for vegetarians.
People with diabetes and
cardiovascular ailments
can also benefit
from this grain.
Because quinoa has
a higher fat content
compared to beans or maize,
it is a good source
of heart-friendly fats
like Omega-6 and Omega-3 acids.
It also has a large dose
of fiber which is known
to lower levels and reduce
buildup of cholesterol.
And for diabetics, help
control blood glucose levels.
Quinoa is also superior
to other grains
and legumes in terms of
vitamin and mineral content.
It contains the highest
amount of potassium
among whole grains
which is helpful
in controlling blood pressure.
Plus it has significant
amounts of phosphorus,
calcium and zinc.
Quinoa is also a viable
substitute to rice and wheat
for people who are
having weight problems.
Its rich B vitamin
content which includes
riboflavin, thiamine,
folic acid and niacin
combined with iron
can help the body
synthesize nutrients better,
produce energy efficiently
and increase metabolism.
Also, at 172
calories per serving,
one can eat in large
quantities with lesser guilt.
Quinoa also has a variety
of antioxidants to boast of,
such as Vitamin E and manganese.
It also contains
several phytochemicals
such as feruli, coumaric,
hydroxybenzoic,
and vanillic acid.
Plus flavinoids like
quercetin and kaempferol.
While not necessary nutrients,
these antioxidants can
still positively contribute
to one's overall health
since these can help
fight diseases like
stroke and cancer.
(slow music)
The Inca empire was
one of the greatest
early civilizations
ever recorded.
During its peak
between 1493 and 1527,
the empire had expanded
to around 300,000
square miles,
covering land areas from Ecuador
all the way down to Chile
and it's believed that
quinoa contributed
a great deal in the empire's
success and progress.
At the time when the
empire was expanding
and consolidating its
territories by conquest,
it is said that
the Inca warriors
ate balls of quinoa to
receive stamina and endurance
to survive long marches
and win battles.
And as the empire's
population rose
close to 12 million people,
historians believe
that the empire's
effective cultivation and
distribution of quinoa
to its people and other
conquered territories
allowed it to feed its citizens
and sustain its
authority over them.
Legend also has
it that the Incas
considered quinoa
as a sacred plant.
Each year, in a very
sacred ceremony,
the Inca emperor would
sow the first quinoa seeds
of the season.
Then in Cusco Peru,
quinoa seeds were entombed
and worshiped as the
forebears of the city
and its people.
Quinoa also played a
major role in the Incas
religious rites.
As a sign of reverence
to their sun god, Inti,
the Incas would put quinoa
in a fountain of gold
as an offering.
(soft piano)
But aside from its sacred
and religious uses,
quinoa also has
medicinal properties
that the Incas used
to treat illnesses.
The Incas would make
a poultice or plaster
made from quinoa flour and water
to heal broken bones and
fight infections in wounds.
They also used
the grain to treat
urinary tract
problems, tuberculosis,
appendicitis,
liver problems
and altitude and
motion sicknesses.
The natives of the Andes
also included quinoa
in the diet of pregnant women
since it is believed
to strengthen them
during and after pregnancy
and that it can help them
produce healthier milk
for their infants.
Now the quinoa seeds
have an outer coating
called saponin.
It's responsible for
the grain's bitter taste
so the natives would
thoroughly wash the seeds
before cooking them.
Then they would use the
saponin-filled wash water
as shampoo, soap and detergent.
But quinoa seeds are not
the only parts of the plant
the Incas found useful.
Its leaves have
betacyanin pigments,
giving them a bright reddish hue
and the natives used the leaves
as a natural dyeing
agent for their textiles.
The Incas saw and used
quinoa's remarkable
properties to their advantage
and survival.
No wonder that they
refer to this grain
as chisaya mama, or
mother of all grains,
because it truly is an
exceptional piece of nature.
(electronic music)
(soft guitar)
Quinoa became almost extinct
during the Spanish
conquest of South America
and its rediscovery
and reintroduction
to modern civilization
is something people
have to be grateful for.
Quinoa originated
in Peru and Bolivia.
And these two countries remain
the largest producers and
exporters of quinoa today.
(soft music)
As a matter of fact,
their combined harvest in 2010
accounted for nearly 99 percent
of commercially grown
quinoa in the whole world.
Peru harvested over
41,000 metric tons
while Bolivia came close
with 29,500 metric tons
of quinoa.
The growing global
interest for the grain
has helped over 70,000 small
family farms in Bolivia,
who cultivate quinoa in
their desert-like lands
using small scaled
irrigation systems.
The significant
increase in demand
has generated increase
in income and economy
in Bolivia,
allowing its government
to slowly improve
infrastructure,
facilities and services
for its citizens.
Cultivation of this grain
is an undemanding endeavor.
Because of its ability to grow
in almost any type
of soil, vegetation,
temperature and climate,
other countries within
and outside South America
are now growing quinoa.
Aside from Peru and Bolivia,
it's also now produced in
the states of Colorado,
Washington, California,
Oregon in the United States
as well as in Canada, France,
United Kingdom, Sweden, Denmark,
Italy, Kenya, and India.
Even the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration or NASA
has their sights on
this super grain.
Because of its
nutrition profile.
NASA is eyeing quinoa
as a possible crop
in their controlled
ecological life support system
to sustain space explorers' diet
during long duration
space flights.
But while quinoa is
still under deliberation
as the grain of
our final frontier,
quinoa is already and
finally picking up fame
worldwide.
2013 was declared by
the United Nations
General Assembly as
the international year
of quinoa.
Because of the grain's
nutritional value,
and its ability to grow
almost anywhere in the world,
the UN believes that quinoa
is the world's weapon
in eradicating poverty,
food, and nutrition problems.
As the UN is
tenaciously promoting
the value of quinoa
across continents,
scientists,
pharmacologists, botanists,
and agriculturists
are also exploring
other potentials this
grain might still possess
and how mankind
can take advantage
of these potentials
for its survival.
Just like how the Incas used it
for thousands of years.
(electronic music)
(jazzy music)
Just like most grains,
preparing and cooking
quinoa is easy.
Before distribution,
commercially milled
quinoa usually undergoes
a process that removes
its outer coating
called saponins.
Since saponins are responsible
for the grain's bitter taste,
most consumers still rinse
the grains in cold water
before cooking just to make sure
they eliminate saponin residue.
Now, to cook quinoa.
Just follow these
two easy steps.
First, in a pot put
one part of the grain
to two parts liquid
and bring it to a boil.
And second, once it's boiling,
reduce the heat to simmer
and cover the pot
until the grains
become translucent.
One basic indication
that the grain is cooked
is the presence of a white
germ spiraling like a tail.
Cooking quinoa this way
will take about 15 minutes.
When cooked, quinoa seeds
look creamy and fluffy
with a crunchy
texture which makes it
a very interesting dish.
Quinoa seeds can also
be processed into flour.
100 percent quinoa flour
is heavy in texture,
so most manufacturers
mix it with other flours
like tapioca flour
and rice flour.
Quinoa flour is gluten-free,
so it's a very good
alternative for people
who might have
allergic reactions
to gluten based products.
Now the leaves of the quinoa
plant are also edible.
Just like spinach, it
can be blanched, boiled,
and even served raw as a salad.
It can also produce an
extract that can be used
in tonics, puddings and syrups.
Here's a quick chocolate
breakfast porridge recipe
using quinoa.
Prepare the following:
One half cup of quinoa.
One cup of water.
Two thirds cup of
chocolate soy milk.
One tablespoon of cocoa powder.
One tablespoon of maple syrup.
And one banana, mashed.
In a pot, put quinoa and
water and bring it to a boil.
Reduce heat and then add
the chocolate soy milk.
Let it simmer for
five to seven minutes.
Or until most of the liquid part
has been absorbed by the quinoa.
Remove from heat and
then stir in the rest
of the ingredients.
The cocoa powder,
maple syrup and banana.
You can make it more delicious
by adding chopped
nuts or berries.
And for a burst of flavor,
put a dash of ground cinnamon
or a drop of vanilla extract.
Another recipe you can try
with quinoa is a salad.
Just prepare the following:
One half cup of quinoa.
One cup of water.
One stalk of spring
onions, chopped.
One red pepper, sliced thinly.
One fourth cucumber, sliced.
One half cup of orange juice.
One teaspoon of lime juice.
One tablespoon of balsamic syrup
and a pinch of salt.
To prepare, cook the
quinoa with water in a pot
for 15 minutes.
Then let it cool.
Mix all the vegetables together
and combine it with
the cooked quinoa.
For the dressing,
just mix the orange
juice, lime juice,
and balsamic syrup
and drizzle it over
your mixed quinoa
and vegetables.
Add salt and pepper to taste.
(slow music)
The ancient people
of the Inca empire
had the privilege of enjoying
quinoa's many benefits
in the past.
And now, it's our
turn to experience
the many blessings
it has in store
for our generation.
(slow electronic music)
(new age music)
(guitar riff)